--- layout: post title: "Transatlantic" description: "How to apply for a settlement visa for the UK when your sponsor is self-employed outside the UK." tags: [expat, uk, visas] location: Montreal, Canada image: /assets/article_images/transatlantic/cover.jpg credit: Charlie Marshall creditlink: https://www.flickr.com/photos/100915417@N07/11935226285/ --- 
For the past year, **my girlfriend and I have been exploring a move to the United Kingdom**. At first we thought of moving to Spain, but we decided on the UK for a few reasons (language and local tech scene were high on the list). Sarah is a British citizen, so moving to anywhere in the EU was _possible_. You'd think her being British would make it easier for us to move to the UK than to any other EU country.
You'd be wrong!
Getting a visa to live in another country is rarely a straightforward process. Hell, getting a _visitor_ visa for lots of places is a pain. I knew **applying for a UK settlement visa** would be hard. And before I started I wasn't sure if I even qualified to apply. This is because _my girlfriend is self-employed_.
And UK’s Visa and Immigration Office are unclear on the rules for British citizens self-employed outside the UK.
## The UK and immigration
The sentiment around immigration in the UK is similar to the USA. They are a wealthy country near many poorer countries. And while the borders between USA and Mexico are limited, the borders between countries like Romania and the UK are wide open. The UK has problems with illegal immigration, yes, but many Brits fear even *legal* immigration from poorer EU countries.
You can find plenty of stories about a United Kingdom flooded by immigrants or about a London where no one speaks English anymore. _These views are sensationalist to say the least._ Open borders with poorer, Eastern European countries is supplying cheap labour--both skilled and unskilled. I've held a pro-immigration, anti-border stance before I was an immigrant. The fight against immigration is one that wins votes, but rarely makes economic sense. (Unless your current market is so fucked you need massive protectionism.) I am *transferring* my position at Mozilla to the UK, so I'm **creating** a job there. And my girlfriend is bringing her business, doing the same.
The UK has been fighting net migration, trying to reduce immigration. Being part of the EU, the UK cannot limit EU nationals from entering. Thus: the easiest group to limit admittance from is non-EU nationals. (Or leave the EU, but let’s leave that discussion aside for now.)
### Restricting British families
In 2012 UK Parliament updated immigration rules for British citizens with non-EU spouses. British citizens [must make at least £18,600/year](http://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/jul/11/appeal-court-18600-foreign-spouse-uk) to sponsor their partners.  This was--and still is--a controversial rule. Working full-time on the UK minimum wage, a British citizen cannot bring their spouse into the country.
Fortunately, my girlfriend makes enough to meet this rule. We're great immigrants as we're both creating new jobs in the UK.
### Proving your income
**If your sponsor (the British citizen) lives and works in the UK, proving your income is easy.** Even if your sponsor is self-employed in the UK, the process isn't hard.
But: if you're a British citizen working outside the UK, you'll need more documentation. A **lot** more.
That said, it is _possible_ to apply when both partners are outside the UK. That wasn't even clear to me when I started. Here's how I did it:
## Self-Employment Evidence
First thing's first: the self-employed sponsor should be able to "move" their business. _Without the intent to move their business, UK Immigration will refuse your application._ Proving this is as simple as indicating it in a letter, but it's important to mention. 
**The British sponsor is going to need to make at least £18,600.** You must convert _any non-pound amounts to GBP_. You _must_ do this at [oanda.com](http://www.oanda.com/currency/converter/). To add to the annoyance: you must use exchange rate on the day you got the money. Have fun with that if you have lots of deposits!
I hope you kept good business records! Next up you'll need to prove your business makes money. Print out your bank statements for the last two fiscal years in your country. Then **highlight every deposit and link it to an invoice**. Afterward, find every transfer from your business account to your personal bank account. This is to prove your business pays you.
Finally, make sure you include your business's registration papers.
If you follow these steps, **you'll meet the financial requirement set by the UK even though you aren't employed in the UK!**
## The rest of the process
The rest of the process is simple: the rules are [online][rules]. Some of the wording on the site makes it seem like your partner being outside the UK excludes you. It doesn't; _applying from outside the UK is fine_. Your British sponsor is "living in the UK permanently" as long as they're a citizen. 
**Even if your sponsor has never lived in the UK and doesn't have a National Insurance number: they qualify.** [Gov.uk][rules] and several visa guides do not make this clear but it is the case. 
If you're living with your British partner, you’ll need evidence of this. I used our joint chequing account (the only joint account we have) and our separate credit card bills with a matching address. You'll also need a few photos of you together.
[rules]: https://www.gov.uk/join-family-in-uk
## How long will it take?
You can find [average visa processing times](https://visa-processingtimes.homeoffice.gov.uk/) from the UK's website. Immigration emailed me Dec 17, 2014 stating they received my application. I had my passport in-hand with a visa on January 8, 2015. **Immigration took three weeks to process my application.** The large amount of documentation I sent did not seem to delay processing time. 
I started working with 1st Contact on October 3, 2014. It took two months to gather documents, fill out forms, get things translated, and attend a visa appointment. **I spent a total of three months to get my visa.** 
## Should I use a visa company?
I can't speak for all visa companies or lawyers, but I can say I used one and am happy I did. I did it because I could afford it and **I had no idea what I was doing when I started this process**. If my situation were less complicated I might have even done it on my own. I would say even if you know the rules, using a visa company will save you some stress. 
It isn't cheap: I paid £980 using [1st Contact Visas](http://www.1stcontactvisas.com/united-kingdom/spousal-partner-visa.aspx). They sped up the process and offered a money-back deal if the UK refused me a visa. **If you can afford it I'd recommend it.** 
## More to come 
I can't find a lot of straightforward, first-hand accounts of moving to the UK from Canada. Especially not recent ones. I plan on writing more about shipping my motorcycle, moving furniture, and other minutiae. I'll try to recommend good companies along the way, as I did with 1st Contact.